{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1344\cocoasubrtf720
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh9500\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 	You can think of black holes like the family of cats. There are big cats, like lions and tigers and smaller ones like the little itty bitty kitty cats you keep as friends. Even though you can distinguish them by their size, they have an awful lot of things in common.\
\
	The same is true for black holes. There are very large black holes, weighing millions of times as much as the sun, and smaller black holes which weigh as much as a couple of suns. Although they differ in mass, they have a lot in common. lets start with the heaviest of them all, and work our way down.\
\
	This is the milky way galaxy, the galaxy that we call home. we are around here. lets focus in on the center, and zoom in. What if I told you there is a black hole in this picture? A super massive black hole. It is easily the heaviest object in this picture, and yet it its not possible to see directly. Black holes are tricky like that-as their name implies they are \'91black\'92. Not only do they not emit light, as the other stars in this picture do, they suck in and distort the light that falls on them.\
	So why should you take my word for it, why believe in this mysterious black hole quietly lurking among these shiny guys?\
\
	Being a scientist, an astronomer, is a lot like being a detective. Detectives solve crimes, even with out directly seeing them transpire. A detective arrives at the scene of a crime after it occurred, tallies the evidence, makes a list of plausibly explanations, maybe gathers some more evidence, and narrows down the list of possibilities until only one remains. \
\
	Well what evidence do we have? Lets zoom in on the galactic center, and watch the action for a few years and see what happens.\
	These dots are stars dancing across the sky. They were carefully watched and their positions were painstakingly measured over the course of 10 years, and from there their orbits were carefully calculated. You can see that there seems to be a sort of epicenter, indicated by this star shape. \
	Indeed, using some high powered 17th century math and physics, you can infer that there is a silent unseen monster imposing these orbits on the stars in this movie. the same physics that keeps the earth orbiting the sun, and the moon orbiting the earth, is at work guiding these stars around this point. using what we know about orbital dynamics, we can calculate the mass that *must* be at this point to explain the orbits we observed, and it comes in tipping the scale at millions of times the mass of the sun!\
\
	Will our view ever get better? There is an upcoming telescope that is designed to peer into the galactic center, and lift the veil on this mysterious patch of the night sky. Its called the Event Horizon Telescope. The Event Horizon Telescope is a network of other telescopes that work together and use a technique called interferometry to help improve our ability to see fine detail and distinguish features in small points. These telescopes are located all around the world, but by combining their powers they can do a much better job than they might merely by themselves. \
	\
	It is a lot like Voltron-all the individual robots form together to transform into Voltron which is a kick ass super awesome robot that can fight other huge bad guys. OK if you missed the 80\'92s and Voltron-dont worry I got you with a different analogy. It is like Mega word. All the power rangers get their dinozords together to form megaword, and team up, and take on huge monster bad guys. \
	\
	By using interferometry, The Event Horizon Telescope will allow us to observe the environment of the central Black Hole, and maybe even see it feed! Black Holes grow by eating. Typically this is in a process called accretion, where gas spirals around the back hole and ultimately falls on it, being consumed. \
\
	Lets pause here for a moment and recap what we learned. Super Massive Black holes are black-we don\'92t directly observe them. Rather, we observe the effect they have on their environments, and carefully gathering data on their environment and the effect they have on their neighbors, and using what we know about physics, we can show they must exist. Also, Super Massive Black Holes grow by eating, by accreting matter from their environment. \
	As it turns out, all of this is true for their smaller, kitty cat cousins, which we call stellar mass black holes. \
\
	As we mentioned before, black holes come in different sizes. The Milky way is also home to stellar mass black holes-black holes that weight a few times as much as the sun. Even so they are also able to dominate their surroundings. \
\
	black hole + disk system and star. black hole starts to strip material off its companion star. the material falls into this disk, where it circles around until it falls into the black hole. similar to water circling a drain. The star is stuck in this slow death waltz-the black hole and companion circling each other while the star is slowly eaten.\
	zombie star\
\
	but i promised you black holes that want to eat YOU. not just gas, not just stars, but people\
\
	stretch out. pagetification. like being drawn and quartered.\
\
	lagsaniafication, going in on your side\
\
	hide ya gas, hide ya stars, and hide ya astronauts because we accreting everybody out here.\
 }